Using protobuf example (#3222)
conan-io/docs: examples/graph/tool_requires/using_protobuf.rst

.. _examples_graph_tool_requires_protobuf:

Using the same requirement as a requires and as a tool_requires
=====================================================================

There are libraries which could behave as a library and as a tool requirement, e.g., `protobuf <https://github.com/conan-io/conan-center-index/tree/master/recipes/protobuf>`__

> Those libraries normally contains headers/sources that compound the library itself, and, perhaps, an extra tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those libraries normally contains headers/sources of the library itself, and, perhaps, some extra tools
```

> (compilers, shell scripts, etc.). Both parts are used in a different contexts, let's think of this scenario using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(compilers, shell scripts, etc.). Both parts are used in different contexts, let's think of this scenario using
```

*protobuf* for instance:

* I want to create a library which includes a compiled protobuf message. The protobuf compiler (build context)
  needs to be invoked at build time, and the library with the compiled *.pb.cc* file needs to be linked against
  the protobuf library (host context).

> Given that, we should be able to use protobuf in build/host context in the same Conan recipe. Basically, your package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that, we should be able to use protobuf in build/host context in the same Conan recipe. Basically, your package recipe
```

should look like:

.. code-block:: python

    def requirements(self):
        self.requires("protobuf/3.18.1")

    def build_requirements(self):
        self.tool_requires("protobuf/3.18.1")

This is the way to proceed with any other library used in both contexts. Nonetheless, let's see a detailed example to see
how the example looks like.

Please, first, clone the sources to recreate this project, you can find them in the
`examples2.0 repository <https://github.com/conan-io/examples2>`_ on GitHub:

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone https://github.com/conan-io/examples2.git
    cd examples2/examples/graph/tool_requires/using_protobuf/myserver

The structure of the project is the following:

.. code-block:: text

    ./
    ├── conanfile.py
    ├── CMakeLists.txt
    ├── addressbook.proto
    ├── host-armv8

>     ├── host-x86_64

Reviewer: If these are specific to Mac, maybe call them ``apple-xxx``? Also avoid the "host" because one of them is for "build"?

    └── src
       └── myserver.cpp
    └── include
       └── myserver.h
    └── test_package
       ├── conanfile.py
       ├── CMakeLists.txt
       └── src
           └── example.cpp

The ``conanfile.py`` looks like:

.. code-block:: python

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.cmake import CMake, cmake_layout

    class myserverRecipe(ConanFile):
        name = "myserver"
        version = "1.0"
        package_type = "library"
        settings = "os", "compiler", "build_type", "arch"
        options = {"shared": [True, False], "fPIC": [True, False]}
        default_options = {"shared": False, "fPIC": True}
        generators = "CMakeDeps", "CMakeToolchain"
        # Sources are located in the same place as this recipe, copy them to the recipe
        exports_sources = "CMakeLists.txt", "src/*", "include/*", "addressbook.proto"

        def config_options(self):
            if self.settings.os == "Windows":
                self.options.rm_safe("fPIC")

        def configure(self):
            if self.options.shared:
                self.options.rm_safe("fPIC")

        def requirements(self):

>             self.requires("protobuf/3.18.1", transitive_headers=True)

Reviewer: Cant the library use protobuf internally?

Author: I need it for `test_package`. If I remove it:
```
[ 50%] Building CXX object CMakeFiles/example.dir/src/example.cpp.o
In file included from /Users/franchuti/develop/examples2/examples/graph/tool_requires/using_protobuf/myserver/test_package/src/example.cpp:4:
/Users/franchuti/.conan2/p/b/myser09621fde1ef62/p/include/addressbook.pb.h:10:10: fatal error: 'google/protobuf/port_def.inc' file not found
#include <google/protobuf/port_def.inc>
         ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1 error generated.
make[2]: *** [CMakeFiles/example.dir/src/example.cpp.o] Error 1
make[1]: *** [CMakeFiles/example.dir/all] Error 2
make: *** [all] Error 2
```

    Build requirements
        protobuf/3.18.1#ac69396cd9fbb796b5b1fc16473ca354:e60fa1e7fc3000cc7be2a50a507800815e3f45e0#0af7d905b0df3225a3a56243841e041b - Cache
    ...

    -- Install configuration: "Release"
    -- Installing: /Users/myuser/.conan2/p/b/myser03f790a5a5533/p/lib/libmyserver.a
    -- Installing: /Users/myuser/.conan2/p/b/myser03f790a5a5533/p/include/myserver.h
    -- Installing: /Users/myuser/.conan2/p/b/myser03f790a5a5533/p/include/addressbook.pb.h

    myserver/1.0: package(): Packaged 2 '.h' files: myserver.h, addressbook.pb.h
    myserver/1.0: package(): Packaged 1 '.a' file: libmyserver.a
    ....

    ======== Testing the package: Executing test ========
    myserver/1.0 (test package): Running test()
    myserver/1.0 (test package): RUN: ./example
    Test(): created a person with id 1337

After seeing it's running OK, let's try to use cross-building. Notice that this part is based on MacOS Intel systems,
and cross-compiling for MacOS ARM ones, but you could use your own profiles depending on your needs for sure.

.. code-block:: shell

>     $ conan create . --build missing -pr:b host-x86_64 -pr:h host-armv8

Reviewer: Maybe this is very OSX specific, a clearer warning that those profiles are Mac only might be good
